Did anybody meet you? How did you find a place to
spend the night that night and a place to live? We
had to go to Brian. Okay. We stayed in a building
that was...
It's a pawn shop now. It's on north... north of
the...
See, the courthouse was built like this, and it was
all open on that. And then the main street was down
here. And the reason for the change, moving the
stuff down the main street, was that the rent got
too high around the courthouse. And so there
wasn't anything there, just some big old houses.
And one of them up there, up there,
what was it, the 24th, it'd be about 23rd Street or
something. It was on that side. There was a house
that we stayed in until our furniture came. The
furniture was shipped by railroad.
Did you bring any toys or anything with you? No. No,
there wasn't much room in that old car, except it
was a big outfit. It had plenty of room in it. But I
don't remember that one. But it was so big and so
long that we didn't own it very long. About what
speed could it drive? Okay. That's going to go up
50, 60 miles. Oh, it would? Really? Oh, it was a
powerful engine. Did your dad have to work on it
much? No. It was sold here in a fellow that had a...
We traded it for a 21 Dodge
because Mama could drive that. With a pillow
behind her. Otherwise, she couldn't drive. So
that's the reason we got rid of her. How did y'all
find a place to live? Oh, the place to live. You mean
on the campus? Yes, sir. They were all set out. They
were set out by the administration. Okay.
Describe the house y'all ended up with. one we
ended up with was on the end of what's called
Quality Road. You know where that is? It's a street
that's straight south. I'll have to get a map to
show it. It's the one that goes... By the
President's house now? Yeah. Okay.
And so that that building there was supposed to be
for the entomology department when Dr. Bilsing
was head of the entomology department. What's his
name? Bilsing. B-I-L-S-I-N-G.
And the house we lived in is on Texas, on Bush Drive
right now.
We'll have to look and see what the street number
is. It's the one that burned On Texas Avenue a while
back. You mean on George Bush? Yeah. Oh, yeah.
Yeah, on the corner. Yeah, well, we lived in that
house for... When it was on the campus. On the
campus, right down there. It's the last house on
this side. Your last house on this side was ours.
The next house was one that Walton's had, T.O.
Walton and his family had. And then the next house
was supposed to be for the head of the Agricultural
Experiment Station. A fellow named Connor, I
remember, was one of them that lived in that house.
And then the next house, up there on the corner, was
Dean Bowman's house. And across the street from
there, next to the guy in the hall, was
Frapp's house. Dr. Frapp's. F-R-A-P-P? No, not P,
not double P. I think he was just playing. F-R-A-P?
S. Huh? S-A. No, Frapp's. Frapp's. F-R-A-P-S.
What did he teach? He was a...
Chemists for the state of Texas.
And they had a building
which is now pretty close to the biology building.
About how long did it take your furniture, your
family's furniture, to get here after y'all got
here? Oh, probably a million.
Two or three weeks. You could see it was all crated.
The only way you could ship it, we didn't have it.
And they had to get some wagons and horses, and they
hauled it from the railroad tracks up there, right
up there. How big was the college station? The
railroad station for the college. How big was it?
It exists over here. It's that size?
It exists on 30. You go over that way. That's the old
building. Okay. Somebody built a model of it up
here. Yes, sir. Well, it looks like that. It was
about that size. No, that one's small. Okay. It was
bigger. Look at the one on 30. You can find out how
big it was. It was a huge thing. There were two of
them. There was the SP and the INGN. Right side by
side. And the two tracks came down there like that.
Then they went down their little ways and crossed
like this. Was there any feeling that one of those
railroads was better than the other? No, you had to
use it. You had to use both of them. That's what I
thought.
You had to get to certain lines.
Now the INGN
came through Hearn and you could take that and you
could wind up in Kansas City the next day. Now the
Southern Pacific, they had a good train service,
excellent, excellent. In the morning, you got two
trains going, one north and one south like this,
stopped everywhere. And then in the afternoon,
they did the same thing. Same
thing. And then later, they put that streamliner
on. Now that was in 28. That was much later.
It stopped here. But it was a through train. It
didn't stop at all the little towns. No, you see it
stopped here because of the federal law that
established the college. The moral act specified
that the That the train have to stop at any... I did
not know that. You should go read the moral act.
Very good, very good. 1860-some. Yeah, 1863.
Yeah. Well, you can read that, and it'll tell you
that the clause in there that you have to, the train
has to stop and discharge passengers. This is an
editorial note to the typist. Mention of the
Morrill Act, M-O-R-R-I-L-L, causes me to offer
this addition. Once, after giving a freshman
history lecture here on this campus about 30 years
ago, a young man came up to me and introduced
himself and told me that he was the
great-great-grandson of Senator Morrill and
that he was the first member of the family to go to a
land-grant college. I presume he was telling me
the truth. I did check and find out that he was a
descendant, but I thought how nice it is that the
first descendant of the man who sponsored the
Land-Grant Act, the first one that ever attended a
land-grant college, came to Texas A&M. End of
note. So you all moved in. Describe the house and
the neighborhood. Well, they took, they had to go
take those big old wagons and things. They went
down there and unloaded that boxcar. And they
brought it up there and it was all crated. Did the
college do that? Yeah. Okay. See, Dr. Bilson was
single. So he lost his He didn't, he lost the fact
that he had to. And another one that was, that that
house had been lived in was Charles Friley. And his
wife died in that house. His first wife. And
Charles Friley was the registrar. He later went to
Iowa State College. About how many faculty houses
were there on campus? Oh, there's a whole, you
know, everything. 50? 100? Yeah, 50. At least 50 or
so, or more than that. Describe the house y'all
were in. How big was it? How many bedrooms? You just
had to go over there and look at it. No, but... Oh, it
had...
Oh, it had a big old kitchen in the back end.
Bathroom, good bathroom. And my mother...
brought in that great big old range, that cast iron
range, and put it up in there. See, we had heatwood
wood. We had cookwood wood. The only other thing we
had was some of the families had a kerosene stove.
Three or four burners had a kerosene stove until
1928. And that's when we brought in the natural
gas. But you did have electricity, but nobody had
electric heating then, of course. No. And y'all
didn't use any coal to heat with or to cook with?
Some coal? The college
used coal. And that was an argument with the
natural gas people. They tried to tie the The
colleagues drew a contract so that the people
around here could get it. In other words, then they
opened it up, and we're going to
give gas to everybody, see? But the guy made a
mistake.
The Lone Star Gas Company went in there and they
gave their construction crews all the data on the
part they built around there. They didn't tell
them not to do it.
And so what happened was, I was out there one day and
See, our house was on that side. This was after
College Park was built in 28. And our house was
built in 24.
I saw them over there, and they were laying that
pipe for a while. And then I walked out there one
day, and here they were with torches cutting it up.
And I knew what they were trying to do. So I called my
father and said, they're cutting that. pipe up
trying to fill those ditches back then. He came
down there and he told that construction foreman,
you're on private property, get off. So then they
had to go to negotiation. But we did get it all
right. Now, when you all got here, you came in the
summer when you moved? About in August. August.
And then school started for you as a first grader?
No. What grade were you in? I wasn't in any. Oh, you
were too young? No, my birthday is October the 7th.
Okay. Therefore, I didn't qualify to start
school. So what did you do that year? I went to some
sort of... preschool. I don't remember what it
was. Who were your family's first close friends?
With whom did you all make... The Waltons.
Describe the Waltons, please. They were a
wonderful family. Wonderful. The oldest one was
what's her name?
They had The oldest girl, he married,
he was an instructor. I mean, he did some, you have
to excuse me sometimes. Oh, I understand. Don't
worry about that. My memory, your memory is good.
Mine fails.
Just a minute.
Well, the oldest girl, she was much older than I
was. She died here just a short time ago.
And then they had a, oh, yeah, they had Turner.
Turner, oh, now I remember. Turner Walton was the
oldest son. He was going to school to be a doctor,
which we did. We did. Turtle water. And then this
oldest girl, and then there was another girl, and
then there was Teal. Was he about your age? Yeah. We
all played together. All right. Describe... They
were good. Now... I told you we were on this side of
the street. But wait just a minute. Describe Mr.
Walton. I don't know. What size man was he and what
was his purpose?
He was a large man. But his real quality was he was
head of the extension service. That's where the
original job was. But he was a man, when you asked
him to talk, he didn't talk. He'd get in front of a
crowd and talk to them. Was he pleasant to be with? I
never heard, never saw him. When
we were there, we
got smallpox. No, we didn't get smallpox. We got
chicken pox. And we never got nipped there either.
Two that we missed. But there were others. And they
quarantined it. The doctor had quarantined it.
The doctor quarantined us. So dad went to town and
got him a place to stay. We had a trolley. You
remember the trolley? It ran down Old College?
Yeah, it was there. It was there. About how often
did it run?
I don't know. It ran at the end of the day or back in
the morning. I don't really know. Remember what it
cost to ride it? I just know the man that propelled
it. That's all I knew. He worked in it. I think they
just run in the morning and in the evening. They
just carry a bunch of people back and forth. Did it
get its electricity from above or on the ground?
Overhead. Overhead. And the E.E. department
would back them up? And where did it go downtown,
Brian? Where in downtown was its turnaround? Was
it on Main Street or at the courthouse? No. Well,
GTE or, you know, where it is. And the building that
the old
Eagle was in? Mm-hmm. Directly across from the
library in Bryant. Okay. That building is there,
and I think that somebody else is taking it over.
But it ended up right there. Right there. In that
side street. Okay. Between there and the E
building. Okay. Or the end, whatever it is.
Mm-hmm. The... It went there, and it went clean out
to,
went out to Ursul, all the way out. Okay. You could
ride it through out there, and they had a convent
out there. Out at Villa Maria. Yeah. It had a
convent that was, had
your, not nurses, your... Sisters. Sisters,
mm-hmm. I took a... Music out there. All right, so
the first year you're not going to school, what
were your dad, as far as you recall, what were your
dad's first assignments as a faculty member here?
Get that department running. Was he the first one?
Did he start ag engineering? No. You see, again, I
told you about the one in Mississippi. Mm-hmm.
training, they did it right here. It's right
there. Right on the side of this, where the ag
building is now. There was a huge building like
this. The ag engineering building opened into
that, which is sitting right here. There you go.
You're right here. You can go down through there.
And when they built the agriculture building in
24, they tore that building down. How many faculty
members were there in Ag Engineering when your dad
came? He had one man. I
don't think his name
was Ernest. His name was Kearney.
His last name was He was a Negro. They had two other
men. That's all that was in the department. He was
supposed to teach ag engineering. And so he was
busy hustling
men to work. They had the appropriations for like
the whole thing. Now who was the Dean of
Agriculture then? Kyle, describe him. We don't
know much about him in terms of his personality.
Great man. Describe him physically. About 5'8",
5'9"? What color hair?
Was he gray then? He was a young man. His wife was...
She was gorgeous. And
she just took care of everything. And
when we got married, she sent word to my mother that
she wanted to take me and Margaret to the Gilders.
And she bought the rings. My, my. My, how great.
Now, where did the Kyles live? Did they live on
campus? Yeah. You know, that thing circled around
here to the, what's the, towards the railroad
where Auburn had his tower. It's on the north part
of that circle. Okay. The first house was probably
Dean Kyle's house. The second house was Dr.
Mostella's house. And then on the corner would be
Dr. Ellinger's house. Ellinger? Yeah. What did he
teach? He was a college physician. Oh, yes, yes,
yes. And the building they just tore down, that was
the hospital. Yes, yes. Was it standing then? It
was standing then. Okay. And the trolley came in on
the east side of that and stopped right there in
that little old house. or almost out in front of the
lawn there. And that's where that trolley
stopped.
What about the, please share as much information
as you can remember about the Bazells, because he
was the president when you all got here. Well, the
only thing I was telling you, the
only thing I knew about him was the time he got
around the house. Got what? Drowned out. Oh,
describe that. Well, Dr. Rizal, the only thing
wrong with him was that he was a
man who would take it on himself not to let his
subordinates react, but he'd react. You know. And
so, I don't know the... See, he lived in that house
right there. The president's house. The
president's home, and it's faced this way. Right
next to... And there was a building right here,
which was a dormitory. It had... It was masonry all
the way on each side of it, on each side of that
thing. But the... All the... steps were in the
middle of it were cast iron. The old cast iron, it
was built all the way from the foundation to clear
up, but it was cast iron. And you didn't even have
treads on it. You had a tread on it, but you didn't.
So what the kids did, you had these GI cans. They
were about this tall. They called them GI cans, and
they were water, heavy as hell, and about that big
around, about 34, 30 inches tall, I guess,
something like that. So that was a favorite trick
for them for grinding their buddies out, because
they'd get up on the roof, carry that water up there
on the roof, and you'd be walking up there, and then
all of a sudden, the water comes.
I never did get around that. One time, he just
missed me. That's all. He threw it right straight
at me, but I missed him. But at that time, they
decided they'd make a ruckus, these kids in the
dormitory, and get the doctor over there. But they
took their GI cans and rolled them down that
stairway out of cast iron. You can imagine the
racket that that had. So he came over there. He
started up that stairs and got up there to the top.
And he was going to go inside and see if he could
straighten things out. About that time, those
little boys took that can and turned it upside down
over the parapet wall. and drowned him out. And he
backed down, and he sat there. He backed down, and I
don't know whether he looked up or something like
that, and then he tried it again. And they had
another can, and they had drowned him out a second
time. And he just sat there on the steps and cried.
Did he do anything to him? Did he punish him? No.
Now, I interviewed his daughter two years ago. Do
you remember her? She was an astonishingly pretty
girl and went for two years as a freshman and a
sophomore here in the early 20s. Yeah, they did.
She attended classes. You see, there's another
one, too. Mrs. Marstella. Mm-hmm. The dean's wife
of the vet school, Dr. Mostella, she got
everything done and all the coursework done, but
they wouldn't let her sign a certificate to ask for
a diploma. Do you remember any mistreatment of
those few coeds? How were they treated by the... I
never saw them. I never saw very many of them. I just
knew them later as grown women or grown girls. They
were much older than I was. This Bazell daughter
who died two weeks ago at age 97. She's He's nine
years older than I am. She said it was marvelous to
be a co-ed then, because she said it was a lot of fun
to be with all those boys. Oh, yeah. I gave her a
photo of a picnic out on the lawn in front of the
president's house, and Bernard Sabisa is
standing over at one side. Do you remember Mr.
Sabisa? No. No, he was gone when I got...
I don't know, Marjorie Duncan.
Duncan was head of the thing there. And she was my
age. And I was a dried up shrimp. When I went to
Interdandium, I weighed 105 pounds. And I
couldn't expand my chest or anything. Yeah, the
old colonel had to pass an examination to even go in
the first two years of it. He was there and
I don't know, I think I must have had some fevers,
some rheumatic fevers years ago and it just, I've
always been short of breath and so He looked at me
and put his tape around me and I couldn't do
nothing. And so he just, I saw him do this. He just
grabbed ahold of it like this.